.TH LIBKECCAK_FAST_UPDATE 3 LIBKECCAK-%VERSION%
.SH NAME
libkeccak_fast_update - Partially hash a message without erasure
.SH SYNOPSIS
.LP
.nf
#include <libkeccak.h>
.P
int libkeccak_fast_update(libkeccak_state_t *\fIstate\fP, const char *\fImsg\fP, size_t \fImsglen\fP);
.fi
.P
Link with \fI-lkeccak\fP.
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR libkeccak_fast_update ()
function continues (or starts) hashing a message.
The current state of the hashing is stored in \fI*state\fP,
and will be updated. The message specified by the \fImsg\fP
parameter with the byte-size specified by the \fImsglen\fP
parameter, will be hashed.
.PP
The
.BR libkeccak_fast_update ()
function may reallocate the state's message chunk buffer.
When doing so, it attempts to do so as quickly as possible,
rather than ensuring that the information in the old
allocation is securely removed if a new allocation is required.
.SH RETURN VALUES
The
.BR libkeccak_fast_update ()
function returns 0 upon successful completion. On error,
-1 is returned and \fIerrno\fP is set to describe the error.
.SH ERRORS
The
.BR libkeccak_fast_update ()
function may fail for any reason specified by the function
.BR realloc (3).
.SH Notes
Neither parameter by be \fINULL\fP or 0.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR libkeccak_state_initialise (3),
.BR libkeccak_update (3),
.BR libkeccak_fast_digest (3),
.BR libkeccak_digest (3)
.SH AUTHORS
Principal author, Mattias Andrée.  See the LICENSE file for the full
list of authors.
.SH BUGS
Please report bugs to https://github.com/maandree/libkeccak/issues or to
maandree@member.fsf.org
